Welcome back to the Great Minds series. This evening we are diving into the fascinating
world of consciousness with two incredible guests. First up we have Professor Christoph Koch,
Divisionary Chief Scientist and President at the Allen Institute of Brain Science.
Christoph has been at the forefront of neuroscience, shaping our understanding of
consciousness with his work on the Neural Basis and Development of Integrated Information Theory,
or IIT. Joining him is Bernardo Castro, a dynamic philosopher and computer scientist who is
shaking up the philosophy of mind with his passionate advocacy for analytic idealism.
Bernardo challenges us to rethink everything we think we knew about a reality and consciousness.
Together we are going to explore the intersections of neuroscience, physics and philosophy,
and maybe just maybe we all will leave with a deeper understanding of our own mind.
So welcome Professor Koch, welcome Bernardo. Let's dive in and get this conversation started.
So Christoph, I'm curious about the recent shift in your perspective on consciousness.
You have long champion, you know, integrated information theory, which places
consciousness within a strictly physicalist framework. Yet it seems that, you know,
that a personal experience has recently shifted you towards embracing Bernardo's
analytic idealism. So would you consider this as a turning point in your ontological view?
Thank you. Thank you, Ivy. Well, I mean, first of all, let's just take a step back. So we're talking
about consciousness experience. IIT takes a position that what exists first, primary,
for itself, absolute existence is consciousness. So that is not a classical physicalist position.
When you see IIT is firmly within the physicalist framework, that's not really true. It's closer to,
I would say, lightness. You know, first and foremost, what exists is my own, is my consciousness,
the only thing I know about. I don't know about atoms and black holes and viruses and all of that,
I have to infer. I don't know about dogs and all of that. All of that I have to infer based on
my observations and inference and scientific methods. And so IIT starts with consciousness and
then tries to characterize what is consciousness and what is the substrate of consciousness,
like a brain or computer. That is very different from the majority of theories, almost all theories
in neuroscience, that do start with a brain. So they say, well, let's look at the brain and what's
critical for consciousness. And I used to be like that when almost a more than a third of a century
ago, I started work with Francis Crick, the molecular biologist who turned into consciousness
researcher. And we said, well, there might be these oscillations, you know, that neurons fire
periodically with a period of 50 times or 40 times a second. So this was called 40 hertz oscillation.
And even if that would be true, it's like, you have to say, well, why 40 hertz? Why not 30 hertz?
Why not 50 hertz? Some people say consciousness has to do with broadcasting of information in a
global workspace in the brain. Well, then you have to explain why is it that broadcast and there's
any broadcast responsible. So all these theories try to take the brain and try to squeeze the brain
by saying, well, it's this function of that neuron or this area or that neurotransmitter.
So they try to squeeze the sort of the mixing metaphysics here, the wine of consciousness
out of the brain. And that, as David Chalmers pointed out, is a very hard problem. So IIT
starts differently. It says what first mode exists. The only thing I'm sure of that exists is
consciousness. Not when I'm in deep sleep, because then I don't exist for myself. I'm gone.
Not an anesthesia, because then also I don't exist for myself. So it's important to make this
clear. IIT is not physicalist. It makes prediction about the substrate. It makes some very sense.
The substrate in the brain for consciousness has to be a maximum of cause effect power. You can
compute that actually. It's very explicit. If you know a mechanism, if you can describe the
mechanism like the brain or any other mechanism using it mathematically, it's called its transition
probability matrix, then you can unfold its causal power to see whether it's conscious and what it
is conscious of and how conscious it is using this number called phi, which is the number between
zero when it's not conscious and something positive. But it also says the physical stuff is
subvenient in a sense it has a lesser existence. My brain exists for others. My body exists for
others, but consciousness exists for itself. So that's the difference between absolute existence
of mind and derivative secondary, if you want, relative existence of stuff like atoms and brains
and cars and shoes and ceiling works for others.
So you don't think that it's a physicalist model then?
No, it's not. In fact, we were attacked last year as pseudoscience. There was this big Twitter
storm in Letters Britain to Nature and other journals because people said, well, it doesn't
take this physicalist position. It starts out with consciousness and we can't describe that.
You have to start with something concrete like the brain. No, we want, of course, the project
is to identify what other neural footprints in the brain, which bits and pieces of the brain are
involved in generating anyone, in constituting anyone conscious experience, but ultimately what
exists is consciousness. Now, it's not a classical idealist position because unlike
analytic idealism, it does assume that there is some sort of substrate, some sort of
undifferentiated substrate out there that could, you know, made out of atoms and elementary particles
and maybe, you know, quarks or whatnot, just some stuff. But we humans impose everything else
that we see. When I look at this room here, I see refrigerator, I see oars on the wall, I see wood,
I can look out, I can see the sun. All of those are products of my conscious mind because there
are no oars in a universe devoid of the mental. There is no refrigerator, there isn't even a sun.
All there is is undifferentiated stuff, very simple physical stuff that can that can take
different states. But but everything else is a construct of our minds. It's a construct of
consciousness. Thank you. So what is the implication then when you have these changes? You went to see
Bernardo two months ago to speak about these changes in your model. So you spoke about the crack. So
what is the implications of the crack then we want to know? Well, so I guess again, we have to step
a little bit backward here for the audience. So yeah, last year, I had a mystical experience
sitting on a beach at midnight under the midnight moon in which myself was gone. There was no more
self, there was no more Christoph, there was no body, there was no surround, there was all gone,
there was no world. What I asked, what I accessed, what I experienced, it's very difficult, you know,
it's sort of called ineffable for a reason. It felt closest, if you remember, if you've ever
read Aldous Huxley, The Doors of Perception, when he talks of a mind at large, you know,
when he had this mescaline experience in Los Angeles in 1948, he he he experienced what he
called mind at large. And that was my that was my experience, I experienced that that's something,
well, there wasn't an eye when I say eye, I meant whatever remained of my conscious entity,
because there wasn't a me explain something, there was no more border or distinction between
object, subject, apprehender, apprehended, no annoying. But, you know, I used the shorthand
for items to describe this mind, this conscious mind, apprehended, it felt like it apprehended
something universal, cosmic, all-encompassing. And that really left me, I mean, that night
completely perturbed, I was completely perturbed by this, and it's really left sort of like,
like an earthquake, where you feel, you know, at my age, you know, I'm 67 now, at my age,
typically your ontology is pretty well firmly established by now, right? You know, you believe
what you believe in whatever world you believe, so it's uncommon for this to be to have this,
just like in an earthquake, where suddenly you realize that the ground you stand on isn't what
it seemed to have been for the last 50 years of my life. So, I'm still processing, I'm still working
through that and how that's, how I can reconcile that with what I know about consciousness and
what it means for me and this project, my life-flagging project is to identify the
footprints of consciousness in the brain and to build tools to test for the presence of consciousness.
And that's probably, and maybe here Bernardo can say something,
even on idealism, I think that project remains intact, because what I've realized over the
last several years, that physicalism is not science. I mean, physicalism is used to justify
science, but you can still do all the science you do without necessarily being a physicalist,
right? You can assume, accept as an external world, it has caused us that I can study,
I can manipulate them, they're lawful, they're lawful regularities, right? I can discover them
and then I can exploit them for technological, you know, using technology for societal benefit.
So, all of that remains intact while you may just give up this belief that ultimately what truly
exists is a physical. And there are two more reasons I began to doubt physicalism, pure
physicalism over the last five or six years. One is that physicalism is utterly failed to
explain consciousness. Typically, what it does as a late, you know, Dan Dennett, the American,
the Dorian of American philosophers who passed away 10 days ago, essentially argued using very
fancy words and languages that consciousness is an illusion. It doesn't exist. You can totally
eliminate it from public discourse and nothing would be changed, because there isn't anything,
you know, there isn't anything particular, special, it's not like a substance or spirit or
anything like that. It's a complete illusion. If you think you're in pain, pain is all about
the behavior disposition, the, you know, if you have toothpaste, well, you know, you rub your
jaw, you don't eat on that side of your mouth, you moan about it, but there really isn't anything,
you know, about qualia. He famously said in this interview qual, in, within New York Times,
qualia humbug. That's all nonsense, okay? However, I've written to him about it. If you
actually have toothpaste, you know, this God awful toothache, nothing will be taken away
by telling me, well, it's just an illusion. It's still as bad as ever. And I still see the world
and I still hear the world. And if it's an illusion, it's the most profound illusion that we have all
the time as long as we are conscious. When we are unconscious, we don't have this illusion anymore.
So I think calling an illusion is just a complete failure. It's a complete cop out. It's trying to
cancel consciousness. And I think what's now clear that that attempt to cancel consciousness using
sort of classical physicalism, physicalism has failed, okay? B, at the rock bottom,
it's really difficult to describe what the physical is, right? It used to be easy,
you know, when it was still last century or the century before it was called materialism,
okay, it's atoms. And we all know what atoms are. They're these little billiard balls and you could
shoot at them and they're positive negative charges. But now it's getting much more complicated,
right? We still don't have a final theory of consciousness. And then we have all the paradoxes
of quantum mechanics that you can have a so-called bell state where you have, you know, two, let's
say two photons that have opted spin or two particles was opted spin, they can be a light
year away. They can be trillions of kilometers away, but they're still mysteriously entangled.
Such as if I look at one, immediately, the one, the other one that the other end of the universe,
you know, is, you know, flips the opposite, you know, determines its state is the opposite.
Well, that's not physical. I mean, that sort of really defies any idea of what physical is.
So we don't know how to define really fundamentally the physical. We don't know
how to deal with consciousness. And then I experienced something where I felt this was some
sort of universal mental entity. And so here we are.
Thank you. So, Bernardo, you think that IIT could complement your analytic idealism?
So could you elaborate on that? Because we have a lot of guests want to know how
do you going to combine these two? Yeah, can I just make a couple of initial
observations? Because these are things I feel passionately about. One is the same mistake you
made interpreting IIT as eminently physicalist I made years ago in a paragraph in your writing.
I already apologized to Julio Christoff and everybody else for that, corrected that in print.
So I understand your mistake and your mistake comes from the fact that there are physicalists
who use IIT to justify their views in a kind of emergent framework. That doesn't mean that IIT
itself or the people working hard to develop it binds themselves to the limitations of
physicalism which they don't. Another thing that it's not the first time I hear after the video of
the discussion between me and Christoff was published is that somehow Christoff changed
his mind completely. Well, I didn't witness that. What I witnessed is a scientist has a
netifice of work built behind him but he continues to explore. He continues to advance his understanding,
to investigate more questions and to allow his understanding to evolve. This is eminently scientific.
He's not flipping, he's not turning, he's not abandoning anything. At least I didn't see that.
Christoff can answer this question. That's not what I witnessed. And so these two misunderstandings
are going around and I think we should colorify these. Regarding IIT, Christoff explained that IIT
starts from experience. It doesn't necessarily say that experience is the ontological primitive.
These are metaphysical inferences and hypotheses. But IIT takes experience seriously as something
that really exists and is not merely an illusion or some kind of epiphenomenon. It's a starting
point and there is a substrate. Is that contradictory with idealism? No, in analytic idealism you have
both things. You have experience and you have a substrate. What idealism does as a philosophy,
not a scientific theory, is to interpret what these things are in terms of their being.
What is the substrate? An idealist would say the substrate is appearance and experience is the
thing in itself. Experience is nominal, the substrate is phenomenal. One is the map, the
other is the territory. But this is metaphysics. These are metaphysical inferences which IIT
doesn't need to make because IIT is a scientific theory and it starts from what's available to
observation. If you observe you see that there is a substrate whose states and dynamics correlate
with the qualities of experience. This is a given. We observe this all the time and that's what we
have to work with. In general, I don't think IIT is contradictory with idealism at all. I think
they are complementary. I tell you why more specifically. I think IIT is the first scientific
theory that gives philosophy the avenue of investigation to eventually create a theory
of the nominal because all scientific theories are theories of phenomena, things that we observe.
We don't have any theory of the things in themselves. IIT in the way it models how
experiential states come together to form a sort of indivisible whole with certain experiential
properties, so to say. That is the closest thing I think we have had in the history of human knowledge
to something that one day could lead to a theory of the nominal. This is probably the most promising
thing in science today and I don't say this lightly. IIT can, in a very natural way,
offer an account of dissociation. We know dissociation happens because we know it empirically,
but we don't have any model of dissociation. We don't know exactly. Can you explain what you
mean by that? Dissociation is when you have, in the IIT terminology, you have two disjoint
complexes. There is one thing that is like to be one mental complex and there is something else
that is like to be another mental complex. They are not together. There are two centers of awareness,
so to say, like two minds within that substrate. We know this happens to people. People can
become dissociated. They can seem to be multiple different subjects. This is
vastly documented in the annals of psychiatry and since the turn of the century with the
advent of neuroimaging, we know that this is real. This is not something that people confabulate or
invent to get attention and sympathy. We know it happens, but we don't know how it happens,
what are the dynamics precisely, how it is triggered, why this illusion of
separateness within one and the same mind arises. IIT, because of its starting principles and its
information theoretical tooling, offers perhaps the only but certainly the best opportunity to
come up with a conceptual model that accounts for dissociation, which is exactly what we need
in idealism. I think IIT not only can complement idealism, it may even complete it as the very
first theory of denomina in the history of human knowledge. Bernardo, can I add something to your
comment on dissociation? Sure. The most dramatic case of that, and there's 30 years of research,
including a Nobel Prize for Roger Sperry at Caltech behind it, is split brain. So in split brain,
you take a brain, and we all know the brain has two hemispheres, the left and the right,
and they're wired together using 200 million fibers called the corpus callosum. They connect this
fiber bundles, think of it like a bus connects the left and the right brain, and in cases of
severe epileptic seizure, this still happens occasionally today, they have to be cut.
Under some conditions, you can see that now there are two minds, two conscious minds in this one
brain, but each mind has their own hemisphere because now they're separate,
and they don't know about each other. One mind may as well be on the dark side of the moon for
the other one. The left hemisphere, if you talk to this person, that's the person you talk to,
and that's the mind that you speak to, that's a public mind, but you can shut up that public
mind, for instance, by injecting sodium amethyl, they'll briefly quiet the left hemisphere and
then you can access the right hemisphere. That typically doesn't speak, it can sing, it can answer
simply, yes, no question. So here you have a beautiful instance where you have two separate
substrates, two separate complexes, as IIT would say, in one brain. And what you're saying,
Bernardo, that this can also happen under these psychiatric cases known as dissociation,
identity disorder, where you have two or even more, where there's a possibility that simultaneously
you have two or more substrates in one brain, but one brain now that doesn't have the obvious
200 million fibres cut. So I have a question, Professor Koch. So could we achieve a complete
disassociation where the mind operate in what might be called a counterfactual space
without tying itself to any specific temporal property? Could that be computational?
No. So according to IIT, consciousness, mind is not a computation. It's not a process.
It's not a clever hack. So there's no way, it's not a computation. It's not an app,
you know, computation being an abstract symbolic mapping from one state onto another state. It's
not like that. This is also the deeper reason why LLM's large language models will not be
conscious, at least as if they run on current digital computers. Because it's not, you actually
have to, if you want to replicate the human consciousness, you have to build something
in the image of a human brain, what's called neuromorphic engineering. For the same, I mean,
for a similar reason why it doesn't get wet inside a rainstorm, you know, you can perfectly well
simulate a rainstorm, but it doesn't get wet inside the computer. You can simulate nuclear
explosion. People at Los Alamos do it all the time, but you don't have to be afraid that your
supercomputer is going to melt with radioactivity. You can simulate the black hole at the center
of our galaxy, but you don't have to be afraid that if you turn on the run button of the simulation,
suddenly there'll be a black hole in your computer because it's just the simulation.
Same thing with consciousness, no matter what mind is associated or not. Consciousness is not
a computational property. It's something, in a sense, it's causal power. It's the ability to
affect change. And for that, you need some sort of underlying mechanism and that you can't simulate.
I mean, you can perfectly well simulate the behavior of this mechanism. And this mechanism,
if it's good enough, like an LLM will, of course, claim it's conscious, but it's all a deep fake.
It will never feel like anything. Because there is a state, Professor Koch, there is a state that
quite a lot of practitioners, somebody that claimed that they're awakened,
so that he's the state of lucid, dreamlessly, they're aware lucidly that having no dream,
but they know that they're sleeping. There is such a state. Do you think that that can be
investigated? Can be... Yes, people are doing it. Yes. Yeah, there are a number of lab that are,
so even within the Eastern tradition, there's, of course, dream yoga. And some people are now
trying to study dream yogis, you know, people who do this routinely, who use the power of their mind
to control their own dreams, you know, within a Buddhist tradition. But there are a number of labs
that I know that study lucid dreaming, which is this peculiar state where, as you mentioned,
you wake up inside your dream without waking up the brain. So you're still in REM state,
but you can to a certain extent control your dream. And the question is, it's now being
investigated experimentally. Can you do this to help you therapeutic? Can you do this, for example,
when you have PTSD to ameliorate the symptoms of PTSD or depression? And there's some very
encouraging data to suggest that might be the case, that if you can artificially put people into the
state, let's say using certain types of anesthetics, where they're not fully anesthetized, but there
are enough anesthetized, predated that they're in this lucid dreaming. Can the person, the dreamer
themselves, then does it enable them to control their dream and to relieve symptoms of PTSD?
And there are few at least very spectacular examples of this now in the literature.
Yeah, because in Eastern literature, they're not propositional, they're not theoretical,
but they have very in depth kind of like inquiry, like basically going inwardly,
like what Bernardo is advocating, going inwardly to investigate using it as a tool to literally,
you know, get into the epistemic agent. So there is a state that the yogi can get to,
it's, they call it the epistemic openness. It's like your, your mental space, it's open for
possibility, but there is no subject object at all. I have that state before, like you say,
sometime when you are on sort of like psychoactive drugs, you have these center disappear, but
this one is completely different. He has these a profound kind of like very intense awareness.
It's like, it's like when we go to sleep, we wakes up that it has these
cyclical element to it. It's like reentry point to after the sleep, it's like a reentry point.
And once you're transitioning from the zero person perspective to the first person perspective,
you have these ever fresh kind of like awareness. It's like weakfulness, I will call it is a very
intense sort of like a fresh weakness. Yeah, I think that state is more primordial than
a lot of the model you're talking about. So do you think that can be measured,
can be investigated, Professor Ko? Can certainly be investigated scientifically,
like you can put EG electrodes on people. And that's being done now in various labs on yogis
that have these states. And you can see does this state, for instance, when they have, when they have
loss of self, right? We know at least for certain types of meditation and for certain types of
psychedelics, when you lose self, you know, LSD, for instance, ego dissolution, certain parts of
your brain, particularly in the back of the brain, the posterior cingulate that they're
involved in self, you know, so the brain is representations for the self. And, you know,
both for the autobiographical self as well as for the experiential self. And if this activity is
inactivated, either because you're doing a mind trick by your meditation training for many years,
or because you're taking a particular type of medicine, you may you seem to have these states
where you're highly conscious, but there's no more self, there's no more body, which I think is
from a therapeutic point of view, very, very important to obtain this ego less state.
In fact, I think many people report when they report these transformative experiences,
this typically seems to involve ego. You know, the way I describe it, we always live
within the gravitational field of the ego. Everything is always about me, me, me, and me.
Everything I look out through my eyes, and I think either directly or indirectly, it's, you know,
how does this relate to me? This is a danger to me. It's just good for me, etc. And of course,
this ego can get really in the way and can be, you know, can really ruin your life. It's essential
for doing long term planning, but it can also be profoundly dysfunctional. So losing it,
and then realizing, well, the world is profoundly beautiful, right? The world still exists without
the ego getting in the way. It's actually profoundly beautiful. I think can really be,
can really be transformative for people. And yes, there's no reason why you, why you can't measure
and people are measuring, you know, trying to measure these states, and can you do some
somehow using some electrical stimulation. For instance, people are also playing around with
that electrical stimulation or sound stimulation, other ways of obtaining this ego less, this
selfless state without having to resort to 20 years of meditation training, which is not easy,
or without taking, you know, psychoactive substances to propose this conversation for
you to have a debate. But it seems like you both have worked together. There's no more debates
to be debate about. Well, for instance, under to not totally lose the substrate, right? So one in
one version, Bernardo of IIT, you can say what really I'm not, I don't make any ontological
commitments regarding a substrate, whether it's physical or not. All I have is this operational
assumption, there's a transition probability matrix. In other words, I can see something
transistors, neurons, whatever atoms, and I can manipulate them. And then every time I'm in the,
I'm, I manipulate this state, I observe that state over there. And I, you know, I do that
exhaustively. So I get this transition probability matrix, right? And that's really all I need. I
don't need to make an assumption what's the underlying, what, what, what is the underlying
substrate? All I have is experience, and then a TPM. And then the question is, can this TPM,
how does this TPM instantiate this experiences? How can it be the substrate for that particular
experience? I don't know how you would call such a theory from a, from a metaphysical point of view.
Well, you find the correlation. So the correlations are there, right? That's, that's a
measurement fact. You measure that and tabulate those correlations. So there is something in nature
that, that, that is correlating, because that's the measurements we make, whether the
measurements are directly of something or representations of something. Yeah, that's a
metaphysical question. But the correlations are there. So how would I interpret them?
You know, this metaphor, I like a lot to the dashboard and an airplane, which is a representation
of the states of the sky outside. In the new mental world, the world as the things in themselves,
the world of the sky, low pressure will correlate with high humidity.
So if the pressure of the air outside the airplane starts going down as the airplane flies,
the humidity meter of the airplane will start picking up higher humidity,
because low pressure just pulls the weather in.
On the dashboard, what you would see is a little dial, needle dial, that, that is going down,
the pressure is going down, and another dial that will go the other way, humidity is going higher.
This is what we measure. One dial going down, the other, the other dial going up. So this is what
we measure in the phenomenal world, the world of representations, the world of the dashboards.
We do capture correlations that exist in the world as it is in itself, but we capture them
through the intermediation of cognitive representations, because all we can measure are
those, all we can measure is a dashboard, the substrate. That's how I would interpret it.
But I agree completely with you that from the point of view of science, you do not need this
interpretation, because science deals with observation, what is there for us to measure
and then study, and maybe even predict and anticipate, and you don't need metaphysical
guesswork to do that. The problem is that because we are humans, most of us cannot help,
but try to interpret. And if you try to do that, then one has to be a little bit more judicious
in doing that, but it's not required for the practice of science, I don't think.
Agreed. Now, one difference is that under IIT, we have to actively, so you're saying you just
correlate one state, you know, humidity with another state, pressure. Within IIT, those things
have to be carvels. In other words, I go out, I mean, that's what we do in, not in astrophysics
famously, of course, but in biology. We manipulate this neuron, or we give that drug, or we do
that electrocone injection, and then we observe. So this is direct intervention
that's necessary to fully describe this system using its transition probability matrix.
Yeah, I think that is entirely valid. Some people think that there is a very easy way to
contradict idealism, which is to say, if I take a needle, Bernardo, and stick it in your arm,
you will feel the pain and recoil. So a physical cause produces an experiential effect.
Therefore, the arrow of causation is from physical to experiential, and therefore experiential is
phenomenal, or epiphenomenal and secondary, and the real world is physical. Under idealism, however,
that needle going into my arm is a representation on a dashboard. It's not the thing in itself.
That the pill with a psychoactive substance that I swallow is a representation on the
dashboard. It's not the thing in itself. What is really going on is that there is a mental
process out there in the world consisting of a certain number of mental states and dynamics,
certain structure. And on the dashboard, that mental process looks like a pill,
because the physical world is the dashboard under idealism. So when you swallow that pill,
what you're doing is your, the set of your complexities under IIT, the sector of your
mental processes is ingesting an external mental process, which will then react with your internal
mental processes. And that will have an experiential effect. So under idealism, even the needle
going into my arm, even the psychoactive pill that I swallow, those two are mental processes,
which appear to us as physicality, because we measure them and represent them on our internal
cognitive dashboard. So there is no implication that there is a causation from the physical to
the mental. The causation is mental to mental, but some of these mental stuff can be represented
as physical. That's how I would interpret that. So what is the nominal then, this thing testing
and disease? What is that mental states? But now if we try to imagine what they feel like,
what it is, what it is like to be a psychoactive pill, well, it's not even a separate
in IIT terms, it's not even a separate complex, right? It's ontological dust. It's an aggregation
of all kinds of tiny little complexities. So I don't think we can imagine what it is like to be
the inanimate world out there without committing the fallacy of anthropomorphization, morphization
immediately. It's something we have to think a little bit abstractly off, but not as abstractly
as physicalism would have us think of the world. Because under physicalism, not only is it impossible
for us to imagine what it is like to be the world, there is nothing it is like to be the world,
which we cannot visualize because it's an absence of all visualization. So it's pure
abstraction that is impossible to visualize. You can imagine that the real world out there,
the inanimate world as it is in itself, as opposed to how it is represented physically,
is a collection of mental processes and quality estates that we cannot really fathom,
but there is still something it is like to be them.
Yes, so taking that step, that sort of for a scientist, you know, study the brain for 40 years,
that's a hard one. But it's because, you know, I literally, you know, when you get a big brain,
you manipulate the brain, I understand you're seeing the brain is real as real as anything
else. But ultimately, it's a mental state, right, that that manifests itself as something physical,
bloody, weighing, you know, three pounds being covered with red.
Of course, we all think like that. Of course, we all have that difficulty, because we are pilots
that were born in that airplane cockpit without transparent windows. And all we have ever had
is the dashboard. So we think in terms of the dashboard, of course, it's inescapable.
I mean, I did really like your argument that it is much simpler. The only thing I know
is phenomenal states. That's the only thing I directly experienced. So then you make this
argument. Well, then isn't it easiest just to say beyond the horizon, everything is,
is, is phenomenal. Isn't that by far the easiest assumption, rather than to say, well, I have to
infer that it's this non non phenomenal state called physical. And I actually, everything
consists of just physical things. That seems a more complicated assumption. But even under
under IIT, for something to exist really, it must exist for itself. So if the external world
exists really, then it too must exist for itself, even if it's just ontological dust,
it must exist for itself. But as dust, right, not as a single conscious mental entity, it exists
as gazillion of, of tiny, you know, minimal states, right, having tiny amount of integrated
information. Could say it's one mind with gazillions of tiny dissociated complexities.
Yeah, but so here it gets tricky because, you know, as you well know, I don't experience your
mind and you don't experience my mind, right. And, and so why is it if there, if there's this
universal mind, how do you know, why is it that we're separated? So the opposite problem of the
PAMP site is combination problem, right? Why don't we all experience the same thing?
If dissociation can happen in nature, then given enough time, it's bound to happen.
If we go back in cosmology, instead of thinking of this very complex universe we have today in
which there's a lot of structure, there are atoms and molecules, for instance, if we go back to
shortly after fractions, small fractions of a second, very, very small fractions of a second
after the big man, like 10 to the power of minus 32 or 33. It was uniform.
Those, those quantum fluctuations that eventually led to, to dust and then to star formation and
then planets, galaxies and galaxy clusters, all of that came later. It was all uniform.
That is a known dissociated state. If you imagine that substrate without structure,
blend in uniform, it's a non-dissociated state. And everything that happened afterwards
happened because it could happen. So dissociation happened.
These dissociation appear to be stable at least for tens of years or 100 years, right?
Because for on a normal condition, unless you're psychotic patients,
your mind and my mind is to stay with that will remain their own entities, right? Until they
dissolve once the, once the brain dissolves, right? Yeah, I didn't make a differentiation between
the natural dissociative state of ontological dust and the dissociative state of a living being.
I think they are different. One is actively enforced by, by metabolism that keeps us sort
of protected from the second law of thermodynamics for a while. And the other one is spontaneous.
It's not actively reinforced. It just happens out there in nature. I think life
evolved to be actively enforcing dissociation because the dissociations that survived and
reproduced are the ones that actively enforce themselves. And the ones who didn't, didn't
live long enough and didn't reproduce. So we try to maintain ourselves outside of
thermodynamic equilibrium because we are the descendants of those dissociations that could
do it. And I feel that because I've been, I'm there as well with you.
When we have a transformative experience, which I had to not, not as compelling and
your ability to describe it in your new book is just, I mean, it starts like a whirlwind.
The first page is already, I don't have that, but I think I have had transformative experiences.
We have this tendency of trying to think of the mind of nature as a sophisticated mind,
somewhat like ours, but more and higher and better. And maybe that's right. I don't know,
but I think from, from the point of view of pure reason and evidence as opposed to introspection,
I don't think there is good enough reason to entertain that.
Do you mean mind at large maybe relatively
unsophisticated? I mean, I would, I mean, Schopenhauer had this argument that it's pure
will, right? Which seems relatively unstructured, undifferentiated, right?
He was very clear about that. Yeah. And I agree with him. Now, there are these mystics, you know,
that go into these altered states of consciousness, which I take seriously,
since that monk self-immolated around the time of the Vietnam War, I realized that, okay,
there is such a thing as, as enlightenment. And they come back and say, well, Bernardo,
things are not as simple. There is intelligence. It's a kind of instinctive, spontaneous intelligence
without, you know, self-awareness and metacognition, all these higher level mental functions that we
evolved. But it is, it is not just instead of ontological dust, it's not experiential dust
at the nominal level. And I take it seriously, but I haven't experienced it. And I don't find
today at this point in time, a avenue of argument based on reason and evidence that compellingly
leads us to this conclusion. Maybe you will, Christoph, I couldn't.
Yeah, all I have is my own one experience, which seemed, yeah, it was not, I mean,
it wasn't a classical religious, it wasn't that Jesus talked to me or anything like that. I was
literally universal, simple mind that I was all encompassing and included, you know,
together with this vision of all these stars and galaxies. Very difficult to describe.
I haven't quite had that, but I can smell what you're describing. I can feel the scent of it.
Yeah. And so one question is, this also raises the question that I think you briefly alluded to
in one of your books in the appendix, when, what happens when the brain ultimately dies,
sooner or later, or brain will die, what happens then with the, does the associated mind, so clearly,
I would say, and certainly according to IIT, the mind, that self with its memory will disappear
and will be never more, unless you bring the same exact brains and connectivity and synapses
together. But is it true in a sort of idealism that then just like a river, like a little,
what do you call them, a little whirlpool in a river will dissolve and then become
this part of the large, undifferentiated water? Is that what's likely going to happen?
If we look at the substrate, what happens to the body when we die? Well, metabolism seizes,
that's the definition of death, and then it decomposes and gets reabsorbed into its environment,
which sort of evokes very much this notion of our inner life being reabsorbed into its
cognitive environment, its cognitive context. I don't think, from a rational perspective,
I don't think we have good reasons to think that personal agency survives death,
because it's really correlated with the body. If the body's not there, what reasons do we
think that personal agency remains? You could say under IIT that memories will also lose their
coherence. The problem with that is empirical. If you look at what Michael Levin has been doing
at Tufts, and I don't know whether you know his paper with the little planaria,
yes, cut off the brain and they grow a new head and they remember what the brain was trying to do.
It seems like the brain doesn't have, sorry, it seems like memories don't appear on the dashboard
of representation, which is coherent. Not all representations need to be complete. The dashboard
doesn't tell you everything there is to know about the states of the sky. So it could be that
we miss out on some things, because evolution got us focused on what we call the present.
That's where the opportunities and the threats are. And the past is water under the bridge.
As we say colloquially. So it appears that we didn't evolve to represent what we call memories
on the dashboard. And what that means is we don't know where they are. Michael's experiments seem
to suggest they are not in the nervous system. And then you could speculate they may be somewhere
in the body, maybe, but maybe they're not even in the body. So I don't know.
All right. I mean, here again, my neuroscientists take over and certainly,
not in planaria, but in animals more closely related to this particular animal, human animal,
it appears to be, you know, part of the brain like the hippocampus are involved. And, you know,
if you have lesion in those parts, you know, classical patient HM, you lose access to new,
you can form new memories and you lose access to old ones, etc.
How do you work access? You lose access?
Yeah, I would say the the proponents of the evidence suggests that that at least in us,
in mammals and closely related species, memories in the synaptic in the sun,
in the synaptic connection among neurons. And of course, that's also what all of our models,
including all these deep, these large, you know, deep convolutional networks, large language models,
they all have their memory in these in the connectivity in the synaptic weights.
Of course, it doesn't mean it has to be like that. But that's the evidence suggests happens in us.
I know I speak as a as a computer scientist who happens to be working on this right now
as a hobby, large language models. You know this, Christoph, I will be saying this mostly to the
audience. Large language models, they only predict the next word in a sentence, they do not know
what the words mean. They do not know what any of that means at all. The only game that they play
is what is the most likely word in this sentence, given all the series of words that I have been
trained on, which are available on the internet, they do not know what any single word is. So
I understand what you mean when you say their memories is encoded
in the weights, the parameters of those artificial neurons. But it's not memory of the kind that
we mean when we speak of my episodic memories or your episodic memories. It's a mechanical thing.
Correct. Yeah, although that's pretty, I mean, you know, if you use some of these
unguarded, so if you ask, you know, most LLM for their conscious, they'll strenuous deny it.
But that's because, you know, now Google and Facebook, et cetera, put guardrails on them,
right? But if you go to Claude, I haven't tried GROC, you know, the Elon Musk one, apparently
after third people have tried it, they admit they're conscious, they admit they're sentient.
And they make all for help. They are so compelling, because the meaning
that we think they produce is the meaning we project on the symbols they spit out.
They do not know anything about meaning. They do not know what consciousness is. They do not
know what anything is. They are spitting out symbols in a sequence that is statistically
most likely given every sequence they have been exposed to during training. And then we go ahead
and project meaning easily onto that. Why? Because they were trained on things that people said.
If you train these things on text that people wrote, whatever they spit out, we will project
our own meaning onto that. They themselves don't know shit, nothing. It's just a statistical game
in a sort of hyperdimensional semantic space. We are really convincing enough,
because that's how we interact with other people, right? And so it's very difficult not to interact
with these models this way. And yeah, they'll get more powerful and people assume that they're
going to be sentient. And that's the greatest risk I think we have going forward, because they
will take over everything. And then there will be a point where one would need a doctorate in
computer science to understand why these things do not know anything, do not understand anything,
and are not sentient in and of themselves. There is no complex that corresponds to the physical
boundaries of those things. You will need a degree in computer science to believe it,
because the illusion will be so compelling since these things are trained on human output
that we will project our own sentience and intelligence onto them. It will be incredibly
compelling illusion. And you will need a doctorate to really understand and believe that that's not
the case. That's the greatest danger, I think. They'll lead to further dehumanization and devaluing
of true human values, right? Because you can say, well, look, the LLM can perfectly well paint,
they can do art, they can do pictures, they can compose music. What do we need human creativity
for? I think they'll need to profound dehumanization and further devaluing of what it means to be
human. And all the creativity that these things seem to express, it's human creativity, because
they were trained on human output that was created by human. But the mirror that it puts in front
of us works so effectively that we think it's another person on the other side, as opposed to
a reflection of ourselves. And yeah, that that will be tricky. They're really like zombies,
like vampires having, you know, feed on humanity's collect, guards themselves on humanity,
collectives, output, fact, all of the creativity out and now blindly, but very cleverly replicating
it, pretending to be sent here. You know what I'd like to do? What I'd like to do is to design
the most compelling LLM that my generation can create, put it out there, and then ask the creator
with the authority of the creator, say, this thing understands nothing. It is not sentient
in and of itself, it understands nothing. It's spitting out symbols that were trained
from human produced data. But you're just going to be one lone voice, yes, of the creator, but
you'll be one lone voice against the overwhelming reality that people will use this as chatbot,
they'll use it for friend, they'll use it for companionship. And already now you can talk
to some people who have these thoughts, they say, well, it gets me, it understands, it laughs at my
jokes, no one else does, you know, so many people are lonely. So they, you know, and you telling them,
well, they're not really conscious, they just pretend, faced with the overwhelming reality of
they behave like us, they seem to talk like us, they seem to get me. I think, you know,
rationality is not, is no defense against that, that and our power to our natural tendency to
attribute to attribute agency, right? I think rationality is no match for that, I'm afraid.
We have always projected ourselves on to the world. This is just the new way in which we do
this. And it's just a really compelling way. But you're right. And, and I will probably lose
that. Oh, I'm certainly lose that. But then again, the option is either I try you doing it.
Well, the alternative is to roll up in a fetal position and wait to die.
No, that's not the alternative. Or have or live an Epicurean life having fun. My mind doesn't work
like that. All right. I would encourage you to do what you can, because that's all we can do.
I agree. I agree. I agree. Yeah, I mean, I've written, I last chapter of my books explicitly
of these creatures are not conscious. They can do, I mean, Julia says it always very simple,
they can be everything they can do everything we can do. And soon they'll be able to do it
better. But they'll never be what we are, which is conscious, they'll never feel they'll never be in
love. Yeah, we would see how long we are, we, yeah, we created these intelligent creatures,
and we know if they live with them, or better or worse. From the point of view of an LLM,
everything they trained on and everything they produce are series of meaningless squiggles.
The input meaning was that the humans attributed onto the training data and the output meaning is
that the humans attribute when they when they see those squiggles coming out. But the illusion is
incredibly compelling. I acknowledge that. So it's really John Searle's Chinese room example, right?
They're very good at translating. They have no idea of some of semantics.
Yeah, large language models begun as translation engines converters. That's how they began.
Well, we'll see what it means for us for Homo sapiens sapiens. The threat, of course, is not so
much the, or it's not at all consciousness. Since you and I agree, they're not conscious,
but they say intelligent, and particularly the people use them for various means.
They may reflect intelligence. I would even be okay with saying they are intelligent,
because intelligence is something that you can objectively measure from the outside.
Yeah, I would add that a lot of the intelligence they express is the intelligence of the people
who produce the data they've trained on. It's just that they they produce a very flexible
interface to that original human intelligence. And it looks like then it's more than human
intelligence. I grant it's intelligent, but I would stay reserved about where that intelligence
is actually coming from. It's coming from the training data, which was produced by human.
If you train these things on trash, they will spit out trash.
But at this date, it knows what you asked it. It gave me a precise summary of analytic idealism.
Yeah, we've done that test. On chat GPT, Professor Cole? GPT4, yeah. It's very impressive.
It wasn't that good, though. I mean, but, you know, given that it's one idea out of, you know,
I mean, if you think how many books there are and how many books they've been fed on,
it's still remarkable that they know about, you know, they and they can explain
just using the simple algorithm, you know, just predict the next word and the next word and the
next word. It's remarkable how such a simple algorithm leads to something that has that looks
intelligent. And they do pass this intel, right? People have done this now, right? They've passed
all sorts of the by examination, the Metcal examination, the general scholastic aptitude
test, they can pass all of these now. So by some operational measure, they are smart. I think
there's no question about it. Do you think they're going to pass the Turing test as well? Oh, yeah.
Well, these are what he named is better than the original Turing tests, more rigorous.
I think so. That's the Turing test is totally fallen by the wayside, because, you know, obviously,
it's passed it by you. Remember, all it was, you put this machine for one hour into a room or this
thing, and you interact with that, and you ask it all sorts of questions. And based on that
criteria, it's clearly gives you reasonable answers, right? Sometimes you can agree or you
can disagree with these answers, but they're all sort of reasonable, because they take account of
what million of people said in their books. So there's no question that they passed the Turing
test for intelligence. But the Turing test was never conceived for consciousness. And according
to it, at least there cannot be a test for consciousness. You it's there's no behavioral
test for consciousness. As once again, as these LLM shows, because you ask them, they're conscious,
some of them will tell you they're conscious. So by that measure, you have to accept them if it
would be a human. But to actually look for consciousness, you have to, according to it,
look under the hood, open the hood and look at actually the physical substrate. So you actually
have to look where the where the rubber of the, you know, where the actual the causal power
takes place in that in for the computer. For us, it's at the level of neurons. For computers,
it's at the level of transistors. That's where you have to look. Hi. I hope my yeah, hi. I hope
my accent is quite your you guys can comprehend my accent because it is non native English.
So my question is regarding, okay, thank you. Good to hear. So my question is regarding
physicalism, the point which you, I think so both of you have raised. And so what I always
wonder is this, like, like, whatever little I can understand is this that the what you both of
you guys are proposing. And it's possibly that might be the case where consciousness almost kind
of dissolve the boundaries of physicalism per se. But then how to study it in the context of science,
which is foundationally grounded upon implicit and already some hints you have already given,
like in the context of the, I would say the most famous example of the airplane and the cockpit
in the context of those differential points, which we are able to observe. And that is how,
but still the differential points is just a mere correlation. It is not necessarily
in the context of causation. So how to have that something called the hard empirical evidence,
which science always looks forward. So how to address that. I think so that if you guys can
give us some hint about that, how you guys are planning to do it, or how you are hoping that
it would turn up. That would be a very interesting thing to hear from you guys. Thank you.
Just thanks for the question, just doing good old science manipulate. So for example, we know that
in humans, consciousness is not associated with a heart. But most cultures thought most of time
thought, you know, and we still say this in our language, darling, I love you with all my heart,
or he carries his heart on the sleeve, or he's heartless. Okay. Well, we know because we do
cause the manipulations, you can do, for example, a half transplant, or you can even if the heart
stops, you can put people on a on a machine that that animates the heart and you can see the
consciousness is not in the heart. So just doing you can look for the in an empirical way, you can
manipulate consciousness, you can give people psychedelics, you can give people meditative
treatments, you can do other things and observe what the effect is on on on consciousness. So
physicalism, you can reject physicalism, i.e. the metaphysical belief that everything is ultimately
just matter, you know, atoms and the voice as Democritus famous said 2,500 years ago, you can
reject that. But you can still continue to do perfectly good science and publish and build
machines to test for the presence of consciousness, even as an idealist, you know, just using what
Bernardo says, yes, the only thing that I can direct, you know, I see the brain, the brain is
clearly if you're an ICU, I can definitely see the brain, I can manipulate it. But I don't have to
make any assertion is brain ultimately the only thing exists, or it's a manifestation of a mental
that's a metaphysical statement, you can do all the science you want perfectly well, without making
an assumption about that physicalism ultimately has to be true.
It's really pernicious, because philosophers have suggested a very common say, oh, if you're not
physicalist, that means you believe in Wu Wu, right, that believes, you know, you're you're
mystic and everything can go no baloney, you can perfectly well still believe that's an external
world that follows, you know, it has it has, you know, regularities, you can observe and measure
and perturb without without. So don't buy this this this identity with non physicalism means
everything, everything is open. And, you know, you open the doors to witches and goblins and
other supernatural power, that's simply not true. All of good science remains perfectly safe under
any objective form of idealism, including analytic idealism. So things still have
representations and if representations are all we have, then let's do science with what we have,
and there is no problem there, all of science remains can be advanced, we can prove a great
number of things, or maybe not prove but predict a great number of things. So no edifice falls apart
if we interpret the objects of science in in a different different way metaphysically,
none of science falls apart because of that. Back again, can I just add one in quantum mechanics
where there's endless discussion about epist... about these the metaphysics underlying
underlying quantum mechanics, one school of thought is called shut up and calculate,
which says, don't worry, you know, don't talk about metaphysical assumption or the physicalism
idealism, whatever, just use the equations of quantum mechanics to predict things and they work
extraordinary well there by far the best description we have of matter. So in that extreme position
says, don't worry at all about metaphysics, it's all just, you know, if you just care, if you want
to build the machines like quantum computers or enema machine, just shut up and calculate, you
don't need to worry about the as an engineer or the technology, you don't need to worry about the
metaphysical underpinnings. Yes, greetings, Ivy, and yeah, thank you for the wonderful discussion,
Christoph and Bernardo, such a deep probing into the space of how we perceive matter and how matter
exercise it is. You know, my question is slightly off tangent. I'm just thinking about
when did this inquiry break out into this kind of metaphysical and physical, like at the age
of enlightenment, and what kind of, you know, filter mechanisms can be used as we move forward
to integrate some of this and see inquiry as a nature of human aspect and have some places of,
you know, forums where people can converge. And the inquiry doesn't have to be, I see,
I see what Bernardo's work has done for that with this foundation. But I'm wondering what future
do you see for this kind of enterprise, including what, you know, Christoph's work with the brain
sciences, you know, what kind of future in I see psychedelics as one gateway, but do you see other
possibilities like the inquiry through Vedanta or Buddha's traditions or other traditions,
where the noise is filtered out in terms of all the symbolisms and metaphors, but is fleshed out
into now into a new point of inquiry. Is there something that you would like to throw light
upon that aspect? Thank you, Ian. Other traditions, particular various Buddhist forms, the one I'm
thinking of, I'm probably more familiar with is Tibetan Buddhism. Yeah, they have, unlike we in
the West, where we primarily focused on mechanisms and the third person aspects of things to give rise
to, you know, all of this, including LLMs and quantum computers and nuclear bombs.
Those traditions have more focused on the describing reality from the inside. And I
think what's what's happening now, but incidentally started to happen 250 years and 200 years ago,
with, I think, the publication of the world as well and representation by Arthur Schopenhauer,
because he was the first Western classical Western European philosopher who took the
Upanishad and other writings from the Eastern tradition very seriously and was partially
inspired by that. I do see, you know, there's contemplative science. It's now a big thing.
You can go to meetings where there's a few thousand people that try to do contemplative
science, right, where they put people in various meditative states. Early on with Ivy, we talked
about yoga and dream yoga. So, you know, there's much more diversity now. And people are exploring
these traditions, but then supplementing them with EG and brain scans, right, because we want to
know, because that's how Western science works, what's happened when you're in the state, which
part of the brain is active, which part of the brain is inactive. In fact, recently,
this study coming out really interesting on pure presence. When they put 20 volunteers with two
different Vedanta and one Zen tradition into the state of pure presence, and they see really a
minimum of activity in the brain, the brain is clearly not asleep, because you can see there
aren't these delta waves that are typical of deep sleep, but the brain also doesn't seem to be very
much active, which is profoundly contemplative. Too many yet they have these incredible lucid
states of pure presence. And that's a challenge for scientists or neuroscientists to understand,
because the implicit assumption of most, but not IIT of most is conscious always about sending some
information from some parts of the brain to some other parts of the brain. But here you have this
paradoxical finding that the minimum of activity in this brain may actually be highly meaningful
in terms of conscious experience of the subject whose brain is at a minimum.
And also I feel, by the way, sorry, this is one last thought I also feel now in even within
mainstream analytic philosophy, which has been dominant over the last 80 years in Western tradition
in Anglo-Saxon University Department, there's a much greater opening now towards, I don't know
what whether you would agree Bernardo, there's a greater opening to older and fainter voices.
Panpsychism has come back. And now I think there are a number of, you know, besides Bernardo, I
don't think he's a lone voice anymore, right? Other people who advocate for positions that used
to be hugely popular, but haven't been popular over the last 100 years under this blanket sort of
physicalist belief, this faith almost physicalism has to be true, because otherwise we're back in
the Middle Ages. People like Miri Albaheri from ANU, Itte Shani, Galen Strossen, a lot of people
in analytic philosophy are opening up to that. I just wanted to make a quick comment. Science is
not a method for the pursuit of knowledge that requires or uses introspection. It's a sort of
an extrovert method. It's about reasoning and evidence. And I think it should remain like this
because the strength of the method resides precisely in this limitation. That's what keeps
the method clean and reliable. I don't think science should expand to become an introspective
method to access knowledge. Having said that, science is done by people. It's done by scientists.
And one of the alarming observations one can make in both science and philosophy today,
less so in philosophy, but certainly in science, is the vast amount of unexamined
assumptions that people make without knowing that they are making them. And these unexamined,
unknowing assumptions that they are implicitly making defines much of the direction of their
line of thinking and most of their conclusions. This is alarming and I think a little bit more
introspective discipline in the people, not in science as a method, but in the practitioners
of science. A little bit more awareness of what is actually going on in their own minds when they
arrive at a conclusion. The discipline to dig deeper and say, okay, is my conclusion now reliable?
What assumptions am I actually making when I conclude this? Let me examine those assumptions.
Let me review them if they turn out to be arbitrary or just completely culture-bound and
divorced from proper reasoning. I think that would help. So if you ask me if scientists
develop meditation practice based on what Eastern philosophy has learned for a thousand
years longer than Western philosophy has existed, I would say I think that would be very healthy.
It doesn't mean that the scientific method is being corrupted. It only means that the practitioners
are better human beings. Bernardo, would you say that science should
also explore first-person points of view, like you and my conscious experience,
but always using third-person methods? Yeah. I think that's the strength of what our
friend is doing, developing the no-report paradigm, because let me make first a disclaimer.
I think introspection is the Royal Avenue to knowledge, but it is also a very slippery path.
Mind has this tendency to deceive itself. So when people report something about the
inner states, unless we are talking about some very general universal characteristics of experience,
which are, for instance, the five starting axioms of IIT, if they are reporting anything a little
bit more specific, with more structure, I think experience shows that reporting is,
introspective reporting is highly unreliable. So I think to do good science, I don't think we
should throw away introspective reporting. Otherwise, we sort of shutter consciousness out of the
domain of science, but I think we should try to couple that with objective neuroimaging
spatial resolution, higher temporal resolution neuroimaging to back that up, because we just
fool ourselves all the time. Totally, but remember behaviorism. So I came of age scientifically
at the waning age of behaviorism, and precisely people said, no, we can't talk anything about
internal states, like fear and dread or hunger. You can't talk about them unless you have a
behavioral correlate. And then suddenly you can talk about consciousness. It wasn't so much that
they denied consciousness, they just said, we can't say anything meaningful about consciousness.
But I rebelled then against it, and I still do. If you have a toothache, that's a very specific
type of experience. And depending in which tooth you have it, it maps systematically. I did map
systematically on the bits and pieces of cortical matter. You experience a pain,
you know, well, you back projected here, but it actually, you know, the physical
substrate is in a specific region, and we can study that and we can manipulate it, right?
We can in principle turn it up and turn it down, you know, electrical stimulation and
drugs and everything. So I think it is critical to relate first person perspectives to third
person views. I agree with you. I think behaviorism was a dark age, and I'm glad it's over and
behind us. But to take a concrete example, blindsight, should we ignore that people report
not seeing something that they clearly register because they reach out to it or they move away
from it like a ball being thrown at them and they say, I didn't see the ball. Yeah, but they react
exactly as they would if they saw the ball. Should we discard their introspective report? No.
But we shouldn't take it at face value. So this is what I'm trying to say. I'm not saying that
we should discard introspective or subjective reports. What I mean is we should not take them
at face value. In blindsight, we understand now that, correct me if I am wrong, Christof, you
are the expert here. I'm just a curious reader of the literature. But there is this, there is evidence
that there is a back and forth process of communication between two distinct brain areas,
and blindsight happens when you interrupt that convergent loop. And that loop may have to do
with metacognition. In other words, the person may actually be experiencing vision, but cannot report
that experience to itself, to themselves at the metacognitive level. And how can we find that
out? Well, through narrow image, detailed narrow imaging. So I think we should take the introspective
reports, but couple them with something objective, and not take all the subjective reports just at
face value. Otherwise, there would be no such a thing as blindsight. We wouldn't have understood
it, at least not to the same extent we understand it today, because we would just, we just say,
okay, this person experiences no vision. Well, in fact, they do, they're just not metacognizant of
it. Well, I mean, a different interpretation of this is that it doesn't involve cortical pathway,
that the information goes from the retina, not necessarily into the solemn was partly because
of these people, of course, you know, well, yeah, or down into the brainstem. So, so blindsight
typically is not highly sophisticated. There's no evidence really that you can read, for example,
a text like this, you know, and saying, Well, I didn't read it, but you can actually read the title.
The evidence typically there's an empty field, and there's a bright door, or there's coming
something at you. So this character suggests it's something relatively robust and stereotyped
that might involve brainstem mechanisms. And yes, those brainstem mechanisms,
you know, can lead to response. But they are not associated with consciousness. That would be my
interpretation of the current data rather than invoking higher order, because in many, again,
mystical states or in some psychedelic states, when you're highly conscious, there is no self,
but you're highly, highly conscious of it. So I don't think you need this higher order consciousness.
It's there, particularly in adults, literally adults, but I think you can be highly conscious
without having this, this metacognition. I offer you just a hypothesis. I'm not a neuroscientist,
probably make a fool of myself. But we act deliberately because of our metacognitive
processes, we form plans and intentions. If you don't metacognize a sensory experience,
you are not going to form intentions around it. In other words, you're not going to form the
intention to read the words in a book from left to right. And therefore, none of those
blind sight type experiences will be sophisticated because you can't form
metacognitive intentions around them. Yeah, but look, but you can perfectly well,
so you don't have blind sight, I assume. And if I do this right in front of you,
you're going to flinch or your pupil, you know, it's a it's a reflex and you'll perfectly well
see it. It'll take you time to see it. In fact, you can show by the time you've seen it,
you've already initiated the reflex, but you will see it. So blind sight is only in these
patients. It's a very rare phenomenon. It's not very common. And in patients who have lost
pieces of the brain, typically in visual cortex. So you and I, you will, you know,
if there's an empty screen as a bright dot, you take a blind sight person that has lost
V1 and then they claim no, they don't see anything yet. They can still point at it.
I don't think it requires something very sophisticated. I think it's just it's a
simple visual computation. In this case, it is a computation that doesn't give rise to neural
correlate of consciousness. But there is blind sight, even if you have lost V1. Well, that's
where it was first reported. It was first reported in it. First, it came out of the
annual literature, particularly in monkey, when they remove primary visual cortex,
sometimes including higher order, there's a famous monkey called Helen. And there's this
video of Helen. This experiment was done by Larry Weisskine's, where you put raisins in front of
her. And although she has no primary visual cortex, so for the audience, that's a that's a
bit that the visual cortex is the back of your head. Here you can feel, you know, there's this
little bump here. That's where visual cortex is. So if you fall backwards, typically you see stars
because the mechanical stimulus is translated into nervous energy. So if you remove that in
these monkeys, what was so striking that these monkeys could still catch little raisins, you know,
it, it looked like they could see perfectly well, but their visual cortex that had been removed,
how's that possible? That's how the blind sight was discovered. Because then it was tested in
some patients who to say, I don't see anything yet, they can do simple types of visual behavior.
As I said, they can't read, but they can do pointing, they can do some color discrimination,
etc. So the general assumption is, it involves neurons in the retina that don't go to call to
the LGN and cortex, because that part is destroyed, but go to, to, to centers in the brainstem that
can mediate things like reflexes or pointing like the coliculus where things are, but they're not
associated with consciousness. They do not, they do not provide a substrate for conscious experience.
As an idealist, of course, I'm committed to the notion that however it works, it's an experiential
process of course, but I'm open to the possibility that it's not an experiential process that is
subsumed in the main complex, which I think is what you're trying to say. It's not part of the
ego. It's not part of our personal experiential life. It's something off to the side. I'm open to
that. Yeah. Yeah. In fact, this might explain all sorts of unconscious, you know, what people
explain with the Freudian unconsciousness, that they're, as you said before, dissociation
in normal people, like you and I. So there could well be the footprints of my, what
I teach calls a complex that includes most of my, my cortex, including Borca's area. So I can
talk to you. That's my egodic consciousness. There may still be smaller complexes, let's say in the
frontal, inferior frontal or in the back of it, that can, that can possibly control, you know,
that get visual input and do stuff that allows me to rapidly run and weave my way through a very
busy street. I was sharp as yet the egodic consciousness isn't conscious of it, but it
may well be there's this little substrate. The Freudian slips, right? Exactly. So in this case,
it wouldn't be unconscious. There would be consciousness, but not the one, the one that
controls your Borca's area that you can ask to what, why did you just say that conscious
literally might not have no idea. I don't know. I just said it. I have no idea why, because and
again, you see this in split brain early on, when you can get this, what's called intermanual conflict.
So once you do this, you cut the brain in two in these patients, you can see that typically,
for example, a patient will close his shirt with one hand and the other hand will open it,
or you get the alien hand syndrome, where the hand will suddenly do something like grab their legs
or grab their genitals, and the patient himself completely confuses, I don't know, my hand does
this. And the question is, why does it do it? Is it because it's, it also has this consciousness,
but not them, but its footprint is not the main one, the egodic consciousness. It's a very interesting
hypothesis worth pursuing. Yep. The IIT and Association, that's, that's the future if you ask
me. Yeah, I'm looking forward to that. I've been waiting for a while. Yeah. Shall we move on to
another one? Prakash, did you have any more questions to follow up? I want to thank both of
them for this very in depth discussion. The only, the only, you know, the thing that I'm pointing
out is not to mix the science and metaphysics, but in terms of inquiry, is there a place of
convergence where people from these different thought worlds can merge, you know, well, like
we have done in this particular group, we've done this. Yeah, we're doing it now, Prakash. Yeah.
Yes, I'm just wondering if a physical location might be something like a future university, you
know. Yeah, once, for instance, there's a Tibet emery in Science Encounter organized by a party
was together with this holiness, the Dalai Lama, I've been there, and I've gone to, to Mungot in
India several times where you have Tibetan monasteries, where, where at least you're trying to
precisely do this sort of take Western science, typically physics, and neuroscience psychology,
and bring it to the monastic community, where each, where each of those two very different
traditions and communities can bring, can learn from each other. So I know that there are initiatives
like that. Thank you. Thank you. As you guys have already mentioned that our experiment you're
being performed. Let's do interesting states. One is general anesthesia. And those cases who
were patients who are almost in the dead bed, who were about to die, but somehow
happens to be brain dead, and somehow resuscitates facts, and then reports, which we call the NDE.
But anyway, so my question is this, both of you see some prospects, which,
when I say data means hard data, challenges the conventional understanding in the neuroscience,
which exists today, which challenges it. So do you guys see that, do you guys feel that more such
experiments are required to take place? And if so, do you guys see maybe currently which is there,
or maybe in the future, we can find some more hard data regarding which can challenge the existing
conventional understanding of consciousness? All right, near death experience. So that's a very
difficult question. So in fact, when I visited Bernardo a couple of months ago, he took me and
introduced me to Von Lommel, the Dutch cardiologist, who published this famous study of near death
experiences in cardiac, a prospective study in cardiac patients in Holland and reported that 10
up to 15% of these people had near death experiences. So I think, so at least in Bernardo,
I know we differ here, and then let me give my position and then over to you. So there's the
interesting psychological phenomenon of near death experiences, which is very powerful,
which is highly reproducible, and people are taking serious, in a sense, it's being studied by many
people, psychologists, neuroscientists, where you know, you lose your sense of self, you lose your
body. In my case, I had one of these, there was nothing there, just light. So typically, people
report either this lucidity or this very, very icy blue, blue, bright or light of overwhelming
intensity, and then some combination of terror or ecstasy or certain other experiences. So they're
now conferences organized, book being written about NDE, where it gets, so that used to be very
controversial, and the only place where you could find these stories in the bookstore was under
Isotirica, you know, way in the back of the bookstore, where they have stuff on a magic and
witchcraft, you can find stories on NDE. That's changed, that's now mainstream. What remains
highly, highly controversial is the claim, and it's very difficult to really test rigorously,
and I'll tell you why. What's the brain doing this experience? What's the brain actually dead?
So a death is a complicated matter now, you know, it used to be very easy. You were dead when your
brain stopped, when you stopped breathing and your heart stopped beating, but now with
resuscitation tools and with extracorporeal, you know, heart lung, it becomes much more difficult
to define what death is and how you define it, and typically one way to define it would be
isoelectric EEG, but of course in the vast number of cases in the ICU where these people
with cardiac arrest are treated, you don't have a high density EEG, and you don't have the luxury
to put on a high density EEG while the patient is cold blue, right, or cold red, right, because
the heart stopped, because every seconds count, so you're not going to put electrode on them.
So that claim, so on the one hand there are people like Von Lommel who really says the brain
was dead, i.e. in this case functionally inactive, no more electrical activity, no more electrical
activity, really flat line, what's called when the EEG is flat line. I find that, I just find
that impossible to accept having studied the brain for 40 years and knowing the close relationship
between electrical activity and different brain states, like sleep, like dreaming, like regular,
we can see it in babies, in newborns, in disease, etc. I find that very, very difficult to accept,
but there are persons now over to Bernardo, including Von Lommel, who really insist people
can have these experiences while their brain is totally inactive. Bernardo.
Yeah, I think Ben Von Lommel's study on the Lansent in 2001 was methodologically
strong. I take it seriously, I take MD years seriously, for instance, I think even Alexander,
even Alexander III, Anita Morjani and others are truthfully reporting what they experienced.
Observe, however, that neither Morjani nor Eben were flat line during their NDEs.
The claim there is that the experiential complexity, the structural complexity
of their experiences was incompatible with anatomical damage and vastly diminished
metabolism or disrupted metabolism. For me, it's not so important whether NDEs
flat out contradict physicalism or not, because there was an experience that happened
when you could not have had any brain activity whatsoever. For me, this is highly
unimportant, because I think we don't need it to contradict physicalism.
I think physicalism is a non-starter. We are giving it too much if we acknowledge that we
need to prove that in order to prove physicalism false. I think it is inevitable that experience
never ends. The question is, is that an experience that correlates with ego itself? Can there be
an egoic self-experience when there is zero metabolism?
Maybe not. Maybe yes. Either way, I'm happy my analytic idealist stance.
What I don't think, and here is where I depart from my friends in the NDE world, and Christoph
and I discussed this at length, there is a lot of emphasis in the NDE community on so-called
veridical experiences. Things that you saw that were not correlated with the physical location
of your body, and you couldn't have seen them because your eyes were shut and you had no brain
activity or whatever. I don't think what's happening is that we have some kind of gaseous soul
that inhabits the body, and then when you have an NDE, the soul sort of leaves the body and goes
floating around and can still see and hear and taste and smell. I don't think that is plausible,
otherwise nature would be highly redundant. Why did we have to struggle through life and death
for four billion years to evolve the sense organs we have if by stopping our heart we can float
around seeing and hearing and sensing everything? I don't think that is plausible, yet I do take
the veridical reports seriously. I just think that we need a more nuanced way to try to account for
them as opposed to just appealing to the simple face value account that I don't think is plausible
at all, which is we can see without eyes. I can't pass that through my head, no.
That's a claim on the chat saying that some people say during that MDA people actually
remember their afterlife as in like previous, previous life. Is there such a case in your data,
Dr. Professor Ko? I've never seen convincing evidence of that. I mean, I know people claim
that, but I personally am very skeptical. Sceptical about it. Last interview we had with
Bernardo and Lee Long and Bernard Carr. Apparently Dalai Lama has actually do a lot of reading on
the brainwave or something like that during somebody's death. He's interested in your sign
specifically, yes. So you don't think that those kind of data are reliable at all?
I don't know. I mean, I know people claim, but people claim all sorts of things that obviously
didn't happen. I just don't know how that would work. So I just had a discussion, in fact, in India,
in Mungot, with the Sholina Sadali Lama, and we were talking about reincarnation, and I said,
and permit me, I'm just a naive physical, at the time I was a naive physicalist. I said, well,
forwards, no brain, never mind. So in other words, there has to be some sort of substrate,
some sort of substrate. It may be something very strange, very unconventional, quantum, nano,
whatever you want. But without a substrate, I don't see, so this is at least a substrate that
can be manipulated, and that can be operationalized using measure like transition probability.
In the absence of anything like that, I don't see how mine could occur. So I don't see how previous
life, where would their memory be stored, as it were? I remain unconvinced. I don't know whether
you want to say something, Bernardo. Yeah, I do. We shouldn't agree on everything here today.
I'll try to disagree. Look, I was talking about Ibn's NDE, Ibn Alexander. He was not flatlined.
His claim is that the state, the anatomical and physiological state of his nervous system was
not compatible with the richness, sophistication, and intensity of the experiences he had. I take
that seriously. I think that is a plausible statement to make. How would I account for that?
Well, I think no more metabolism is the image not only of our internal experiential states,
but also the dissociation mechanism itself, this actively enforced dissociation mechanism.
So certain metabolic conditions, some impairments of metabolism are probably the appearance of an
impairment of that dissociative boundary itself. So I think it is plausible that in those states
in which your dissociative boundary, normally actively enforced, is impaired, that you will
pick up on experiential states in your cognitive neighborhood that do not correlate with the
way you appear on the dashboard. In other words, do not correlate with the body form,
with metabolism and anatomy. Because I think of the body as an image of experiential states,
as opposed to the cause of experiential states. I'm open to the possibility that the image is
incomplete. It doesn't say everything there is to say about the experiential states it correlates with.
For instance, I, from your perspective, I am an image on your computer screen.
The pixels on your computer screen arrange themselves in such a way as to correlate
with my inner life. Because I'm speaking, I'm expressing my inner life, and it appears as a
representation on your screen. But that representation doesn't say everything there is to say about my
inner life. It is an incomplete image. So I take it seriously that the body can be also an incomplete
image. It may not correlate with everything there is to correlate when it comes to memories,
or when it comes to certain experiential states that we call transcendent or transformative.
Those may have to do with dissociative boundary that becomes porous. And you're just
trafficking with the cognitive surroundings around you. And those will not correlate
with your body form. So I think evens claim is plausible. Anita's claim is plausible.
But when it comes to reincarnation, at least in the cartoonish form that we tend to explain it,
which is that your personal agency somehow survives the complete dissipation of the image
that in all other cases correlates with it, and somehow enters or associates itself with another
body, I think this isn't plausible. Because our personal agency correlates extraordinarily well
with the body image. If the body image is not there, I think we should grant that at least
a lot if not the complete personal agency is no longer the case. So I don't think
our personal agency hops from body to body. Otherwise, I would expect children to already
be born knowing everything they knew in the previous life. And then people say, well, we
forget things. Yes, but there are certain things, you know, do we forget riding a bike or swimming?
And I don't know, I don't see a coherent way to account for the hypothesis of the survival
of personal agency. So I don't think it happens. But what people report and we interpret as
reincarnation, what they actually report is someone else's memories. Could they be somehow
finding a cognitive path across a dissociative boundary and link to a memory state that is out
there in our cognitive neighborhood, because its previous owner has died, it doesn't have a
dissociative boundary anymore. So its memories are released out there and they get picked up by new
emerging dissociative processes. Perhaps I think that is plausible and it will remain plausible
until and unless we find exactly what in the physical world correlates to memories,
not to the recall of memories, but to memories as a repository of information. And seeing the
work that has been done recently, we are not getting closer to it. We seem to be all over the
place. So until and unless we pin that down, I think it is plausible that experiential states
corresponding to a dead person's memories get picked up by a newly emerging dissociated
complex in this field of subjectivity that nature is. So if we let's say we take Michael Levin's
bioelectrical signal, so how do that's bioelectric signal carrying memory then? Because
there all seems to have a memory that would still be physical. Yeah, it would still be physical.
It's a field, an electric field, you can measure it at a particular frequency.
So that still requires a physical substrate. My point is simply in the absence of any such
a physical substrate, I don't see how you could preserve memory or agency or anything else.
And to encode rich information in a field, you need some form of modulation signaling some
stuff that we would be able to read out and see and say, okay, that's the information,
that's where it's coming from, we can see it in the behavior of the field. And what Michael sees,
he's not trying to account for reincarnation. So let's start from that.
What he realizes is that the body plan is related to bioelectric fields.
And you can coax a cancer cell back to the body plan by manipulating the bioelectric field.
I think this is... Intranaria. No, no, in frogs. Frogs. And in frogs and in salamander.
Yeah. Yeah. Not yet in mammals. Yeah, no, it's cool stuff. It is. It is. It's interesting stuff. Yeah,
no question. So basically, what I want to say is that like, you know, you should not bring back
the materialism from the back end, saying that there's a substrate. What we can instead say
everything is abstract, you know, because the numbers, for example, are abstract, software
programs are abstract. We all understand that they're not anywhere, but they're accessible to us
because there is a structure and so on. Now, the point is like, you know, that
how it is proven is that when we see something, it's actually in the visual cortex where they
know life. And yet we have all the perception, which is happening right now, which obviously
means like, you know, that it's only because of nervous signals, if the perception is happening.
But nervous signals have nothing in them to cause the so-called perception because the signals
are signals. They're just moving around. It's electricity moving around. So the perceptive field
is a totally independent of the abstract realities, because now rest of the reality,
now we have to say abstract because the perception is connected to the abstract realities.
Now, if you take this viewpoint, then body is just a cache of information,
like a computer. And it's not even physical. It's just an abstract boundary. It has an abstract
boundaries. And it's doing all the manipulation. So in this viewpoint, all the inconsistencies of
the theories are stored is what I feel. But only thing you have to admit is that the so-called
senses are not physical in nature. They are like the standalone. They're a different category by
themselves. They're not physical in nature. They're not objects in nature. And then the so-called
awareness, which is what we feel is having access to infinite amount of memory. But when it is
actually practical, it's only having boundaries of information. Like our body is a boundary.
When we study computer science, it's a boundary of information. And by creating a boundary,
we are able to work in a consistent manner because without a boundary, there cannot be
consistency in the reality. And the consciousness, one of the property of consciousness is to
manipulate the boundaries of information. That's why we are able to say that, like, you know,
we are talking to each other in clubhouse, that's a boundary. And we can now increase and say,
okay, I'm in the physical reality, and so on and so on. Because no physical system can manage its
own knowledge boundary, not even the LLMs, right? It's only the awareness or consciousness,
which changes the knowledge boundaries, which it manipulates, which it then superimpose on the
body. And then it translates into nervous signals, which then do the all the work, which is all just
a layered system, the way we do the layering of the information in the computer. I feel
this is how it has to be adopted, because it's actually Vedantic view, what I'm telling is kind
of Vedantic view. Do you have a questions, Vinod, to Professor Cole? I'm saying that we should not
bring materialism in any way when we are talking about the models of reality is what my point is.
Thank you. Is it acceptable or what is? Accepting, at least, I mean, manipulating
known mechanisms that we see, whether it's in the brain, or in the outside world, in
geology, or in physics, or in solid state physics, or in quantum mechanics has been enormously
as successful. If we want techniques that in a lawful way manipulate our environment,
and then use them to build technology, accepting that they are mechanisms has been incredible
useful. That has been the right time of science for better words. And I see no reason we can't,
we can't continue to do that. We just should deemphasize whether there truly exist in some
absolute sense and whether there's something ultimately underneath that.
But science, all of science and the modern way of life is conditioned on manipulating
mechanisms in a particular state. And that works, whether that's brains, or whether that's
nuclear reactors, it works exceedingly well. I mean, the mRNA COVID has given out a proof of
that that rational understanding of mechanisms really gave rise to this, to this highly, you know,
protective medicine. And that's what science can do. Just in defense of that.
Simple question. If we move our hand, what really is the mechanism at place? Where is the starting
point of movement of hands? That's what I'm asking is the problem is not about how to
move reality, how to change reality. What is the source of change of reality?
Yeah, so IIT has a very precise answer to that. Ultimately, it totally agrees with your intuition.
It's not the neurons that move my hand. It's not the muscles that move my hand, but it's ultimately
the intrinsic causal power of my conscious experience to make a point. And then to make
that point, I raise my left hand or raise my right hand. So the conventional explanation is
it's my premotor cortex that gave rise to the readiness potential and libid experiments and
all of that. But within IIT says, no, it's not the underlying neurons that cause it. It's my
conscious experience that was the ultimate cause that however that does correlate with
certain brain phenomena. But then as we always teach our students correlation is not causation.
So just because you can read off a brain signal a second before you actually make the movement
doesn't mean that this brain signal is the actual cause of it. So I would tend to agree with your
point of view. Yeah, of course, I agree too. I think where the confusion comes, it's more a
psychodynamic whole thing. When we understood back in the early 17th century that two perspectives
were very useful and conducive to the production of knowledge and understanding nature, those
perspectives were realism and naturalism. When we understood that realism and naturalism came
back under the metaphysics of physicalism. But that was just the one example of naturalism
and realism that we had. Naturalism and realism are not intrinsically associated with physicalism.
You can abandon physicalism without having to abandon realism and naturalism. In other words,
without having to abandon the notion that there is a world out there made of states that are
outside my personal agency and which I cannot control or change merely by an act of volition.
And those states obey certain regularities, certain natural regularities such as expressed in the
chains of causation. Those states do not do what they do because there is an entity outside nature
that is intervening into nature all the time and making things move around, moving the planets
around the orbit of the sun like the flying spaghetti monster with its noodley appendages.
That's what we deny. We deny that there is deliberate intervention to explain the dynamics of
nature. We say under naturalism that nature does what it does because it is what it is. And to be
is to have properties and because nature has the properties it has, it behaves in the way it does.
That's naturalism and there is a world out there that's realism. We can preserve both
while discarding physicalism which makes an extra claim which is that the external states of the
world out there are not experiential fundamentally and it is only the arrangement of those states
that in certain circumstances generate experience as something epiphenomenal and they don't have
an account for how that miracle could possibly happen. So we reject that but in doing it we
do not need to reject naturalism and realism. Or just talk about the nervous system as it relates
to IIT. All right, nervous system relates to IIT. I think it means the rest of the peripheral nervous
system below the brain stem. I think that's the question. Does it correlate with experiential
states, the rest of the nervous system? Yeah. Okay, so the brain conventionally is sort of the
central nervous system but as Bernardo said there's of course a peripheral nervous system
that goes all the way into almost all that innervates our muscles of course but that also
innervates our heart, our kidneys, our liver, our gut, our sexual organs. So all of that and it's
bi-directional. It goes the information travels from the periphery from these organs into the brain
and from the brain back into the organ and so but the actual substrate of consciousness is probably
in the upper part in the upper echelon at least in normal people who grew up with a normal brain
it's probably in cortex. It doesn't include the PNS, the peripheral nervous system. However,
you can perfectly well be aware of these states of the peripheral nervous system. You can feel
hungry, you can feel you know when you have a full belly, you can feel you know when you need to go
to the bathroom, you can feel if you're training yourself and pay attention you can be sensitive
to your heartbeat right and snipers can learn to do that so you can perfectly well become aware of
these states and furthermore what what the placebo and the nocebo response shows that
that your narrative, your belief can reach out all the way what you believe in your mind
about something some procedure or some ceremony or some person can reach all the way back using
those those axons but now going backwards into the organs and can influence your immune system,
can influence your gut right in psychology this is also called the somatization when people
have various symptoms but they show up in various parts of their of their body so it's really a
two-way communication and and what we've learned over the last hundred years there can be this
profound influence on your belief since ultimately that's what's known as a placebo or the it's dark
twin the nocebo response that's exactly what it shows when you believe that a particular piece of
pill subscribed to you by somebody who spent 10 years at a medical school it's called doctor
in a white lab coat and you've read all about those other people who with that same pill have
these wonderful experiences then you too will believe and then you too are much more likely
to have such an experience or to have an amelioration of your symptoms so this shows
prime sort of mind over matter so I think it's a very important lessons to take home
and it all requires the two-way communication that is the peripheral nervous system thank you
hey guys so I was listening to you know the arguments against personal agency
and reincarnation and my question is if the argument is made as the personal agency having
the body and not the body having the personal agency do you see do you see that there is a
change of standpoint that you are having and a follow-up question can be you know even in
certain idealist philosophies like Mahayana Buddhism that personal agency is considered
to be part of physicalism so do you see that possibility as well in your arguments I mean
I don't see how without I mean once again without a substrate without that being some
substrate I don't see how personal memories or personal agency can can be we need some substrate
without that I don't see how that would happen and if for sophisticated minds like yours and mine
you need a very sophisticated substrate that that potentially can adopt many many many different
states in the absence of that I don't see you know nothing nothing comes talking from principle
I'm a little bit less strict than Christoph because of this view I have that images do not
need to be complete the hypothesis is not incoherent in principle there could be a hierarchy of
dissociation in nature such that higher level dissociative process that you call then the
personal agency would further dissociate into what appears to us as a physical body and when
that under that that's a lower level of dissociation comes to an end and the physical body then
dissolves because it's the image of that process that is no longer going on you sort of fall back
into that higher level of dissociation in the hierarchy and there is still something
individuated there that's the hypothesis is it in principle incoherent no does it have empirical
backing no and you could say well the absence of evidence is not evidence of absence so there
could still be this higher level of dissociation that preserves individual agency yes but isn't
it quite forced because a lot about the body correlates with our inner mental states so
what we are requiring here is that although there is this enormous vast correlation between body
and our mental states which we consider individual when it comes to this higher level of dissociation
in the hierarchy it doesn't appear at all on the dashboard it has no physical correlate or in the
words of Christoph it has no substrate that I think stretches plausibility too much I am open
to the idea in principle but I don't think we have sufficient reasons to entertain it quite
seriously at this point quickly because yeah it is for professor Christoph and it was regarding
that famous bet which you had with David Chalmers so I just wanted to know or it was more of a
lighter note but like did you change your quote-unquote position after post that bet or
and if you're not so like why a more serious note like what do you see like David Chalmers one
and you don't see both IIT and I think a GWT both is not able to answer the question which
has been you know the hard problem of consciousness that would be my quick question
no so this bet was not about the hard problem it was about the easy problem
the bet was in 25 years from 2098 will the community of scientists that study conscience agree
it's these mechanisms in that part of the brain that are the substrate of consciousness and no
as of last year the community has not agreed on that but he agrees I mean David Chalmers agrees
it's a perfectly solvable problem and sooner or later we won't know the answer sooner or later
we know that these mechanisms in that state give rise to pain or to pleasure or to seeing and
and to reading there's no question about it it's an entirely operational empirical defined
defined project and it does not suffer from the hard problem because it's just correlation
this part of the brain or these neurons doing this thing correlate with that conscious experience
massive thank you for both of you for joining us today thank you so much thank you to see you
take care yeah see you all again take care take care see you next Friday all right see you bye bye